3. Bathymetry & Boundary Conditions
**************************************

All project authors contributed to this assignment in equal parts.

Task 3.1 - Non-zero Source Term
==================================

For introducing the bathymetry into our f-wave-solver we have got the following setting

.. math:: 
  \Delta f - \Delta x \Psi_{i-1/2} =  \sum_{p=1}^2 Z_p.

.. math:: 
  \begin{split}\Delta x \Psi_{i-1/2} := \begin{bmatrix}
                                0 \\
                                -g (b_r - b_l) \frac{h_l+h_r}{2}
                              \end{bmatrix}.\end{split}

.. Note::
  :math:`\Delta x \Psi_{i-1/2}` summarizes the effect of the bathymetry:

Task 3.1.1
----------------

**File: Fwave.cpp**

Inside the computeEigencoefficients function we compute :math:`\Delta x \Psi_{i-1/2}`

.. code::

  t_real l_xPsi;
  l_xPsi = -m_g * (i_bR - i_bL) * (t_real(0.5) *(i_hL + i_hR));

and then subtract it from :math:`\Delta f`.

.. code:: 

    l_fDelta[1] -= l_xPsi;


3.1.2
-----------

We decide to hard code a simple example:

.. code:: cpp

  l_waveProp->setBathymetry(9,0,45);
  l_waveProp->setBathymetry(10,0,45);
  l_waveProp->setBathymetry(11,0,45);
  l_waveProp->setBathymetry(12,0,45);

  l_waveProp->setBathymetry(20,0,-1);
  l_waveProp->setBathymetry(21,0,-2);
  l_waveProp->setBathymetry(22,0,-3);
  l_waveProp->setBathymetry(23,0,-3);
  l_waveProp->setBathymetry(24,0,-2);
  l_waveProp->setBathymetry(25,0,-1);

  l_waveProp->setBathymetry(50,0,-1);
  l_waveProp->setBathymetry(51,0,-4);
  l_waveProp->setBathymetry(52,0,-6);
  l_waveProp->setBathymetry(53,0,-7);
  l_waveProp->setBathymetry(54,0,-7);
  l_waveProp->setBathymetry(55,0,-7);
  l_waveProp->setBathymetry(56,0,-10);
  l_waveProp->setBathymetry(57,0,-12);
  l_waveProp->setBathymetry(58,0,-12);
  l_waveProp->setBathymetry(59,0,-13);
  l_waveProp->setBathymetry(60,0,-18);
  l_waveProp->setBathymetry(61,0,-19);
  l_waveProp->setBathymetry(62,0,-20);
  l_waveProp->setBathymetry(63,0,-24);
  l_waveProp->setBathymetry(64,0,-26);
  l_waveProp->setBathymetry(65,0,-28);
  l_waveProp->setBathymetry(66,0,-20);
  l_waveProp->setBathymetry(67,0,-15);
  l_waveProp->setBathymetry(68,0,-10);
  l_waveProp->setBathymetry(69,0,-4);

  l_waveProp->setBathymetry(497,0,35);
  l_waveProp->setBathymetry(498,0,35);
  l_waveProp->setBathymetry(499,0,35);
  l_waveProp->setBathymetry(500,0,35);

On the left and right side we have areas with positive bathymetry values, acting like a barrier.
Towards the left side there is a trench. The effects can be seen in the following video:

.. raw:: html

    <video width="100%" height="auto" controls>
      <source src="../../_static/assets/boundaryExample1d.mp4" type="video/mp4">
    </video> 



When the shock wave coming from the right side first passes over the trench, first a dip and then some spikes can be seen,
causing another wave going back to the right. The original wave continues until it hits the wall and reflects to the right.
On its way, it catches up with the previously above the trench created wave and swallows it. 
The wave then continues its path to the right side until it gets reflected at the wall. 
The whole phenomenon then repeats itself, but with much less momentun, 
until it eventually flattens out with zero momentum.

.. note::

  Due to its repetitive nature, we did not include the whole process until it reaches zero momentum.
  One can easily assume the rest of the video.

**Boundaries**

We introduced two boolean parameters ``l_hasBoundaryL`` and ``l_hasBoundaryR`` which are passed onto the ``WavePropagation1d``
class. The names are pretty self-explanatory.


Inside ``setGhostOutflow`` we have set the first and last cell as follows:
When there is no boundary on a side, the according cell is set like: :math:`b_0 = b_1` or :math:`b_{n+1} = b_1`.
If there has to be one, the bathymetry is set to 0,

.. code:: cpp
  
  // left boundary
  if (m_hasBoundaryL)
  {
    l_h[0] = 0;
  }
  else
  {
    l_h[0] = l_h[1];
    l_hu[0] = l_hu[1];
    l_b[0] = l_b[1];
  }
  // right boundary
  if (m_hasBoundaryR)
  {
    l_h[m_nCells + 1] = 0;
  }
  else
  {
    l_h[m_nCells + 1] = l_h[m_nCells];
    l_hu[m_nCells + 1] = l_hu[m_nCells];
    l_b[m_nCells + 1] = l_b[m_nCells];
  }



3.2. Reflecting Boundary Conditions
======================================

Task 3.2.1 
--------------------------

Following setup has to be implemented 

.. math::
    \begin{split}h_{i} &:= h_{i-1} \\
    (hu)_{i} &:= -(hu)_{i-1} \\
    b_{i} &:= b_{i-1}\end{split}

**File: WavePropagation1d.cpp**

.. code:: cpp

  // use margin for comparison in case of rounding errors
  tsunami_lab::t_real margin = 0.001;
  if (i_h[i_ceR] <= margin)
  {
    // right cell dry
    o_hR = i_h[i_ceL];
    o_bR = m_b[i_ceL];
    o_huR = -i_hu[i_ceL];
  }
  else if (i_h[i_ceL] <= margin)
  {
    // left cell dry
    o_hL = i_h[i_ceR];
    o_bL = m_b[i_ceR];
    o_huL = -i_hu[i_ceR];
  }

Task 3.2.2
--------------------------

The following simulation has a reflecting boundary on the right side, and an outflow boundary condition on the left side.
We have set :math:`q_l` initially to :math:`\begin{bmatrix} 10 \\ 10 \end{bmatrix}`.

.. raw:: html

    <video width="100%" height="auto" controls>
      <source src="../../_static/assets/task_3-2-2_oneSidedShock1d.mp4" type="video/mp4">
    </video> 

It can be seen that this is indeed the one-sided version of the Shock-Shock problem:

.. raw:: html

    <video width="100%" height="auto" controls>
      <source src="../../_static/assets/task_3-2-2_shockShock1d.mp4" type="video/mp4">
    </video> 




3.3. Hydraulic Jumps
============================

Task 3.3.1
--------------
The following equation is given for the Froude number

.. math::
  F := \frac{u}{\sqrt{gh}}.

There are two individual setups for each subcritical and supercritical flow.

**subcritical flow**

.. math:: 
  \begin{split}\begin{aligned}
      b(x) &=
        \begin{cases}
          -1.8 - 0.05 (x-10)^2 \quad   &\text{if } x \in (8,12) \\
          -2 \quad &\text{else}
        \end{cases}\\
      h(x, 0) &= -b(x) \quad \text{if } x \in [0,25] \\
      hu(x, 0) &= 4.42 \quad \text{if } x \in [0,25].
    \end{aligned}\end{split}


**supercritical flow**

.. math::
  \begin{split}\begin{aligned}
      b(x) &=
        \begin{cases}
          -0.13 - 0.05 (x-10)^2 \quad   &\text{if } x \in (8,12) \\
          -0.33 \quad &\text{else}
        \end{cases}\\
      h(x, 0) &= -b(x) \quad \text{if } x \in [0,25] \\
      hu(x, 0) &= 0.18 \quad \text{if } x \in [0,25].
    \end{aligned}\end{split}


For computing the maximum Froude number and its position we implemented ``setMaxFroude`` in both setups of the following task and used their functions.

.. code:: cpp

    t_real l_maxFroude = 0;
    t_real l_posFroude = 0;
    for (t_real l_i = 0; l_i < 25; l_i += 0.1)
    {
        if (0 < l_i &&  l_i < 25)
        {
            t_real l_u = getMomentumX(l_i, 0) / getHeight(l_i, 0);
            t_real i_sqrt_m_h = t_real(std::sqrt(m_g * getHeight(l_i, 0)));
            t_real l_result = l_u / i_sqrt_m_h;
            if (l_result > l_maxFroude)
            {
                l_maxFroude = l_result;
                l_posFroude = l_i;
            }
        }
    }

Within the function we iterate over the full interval (0,25). The Froude number gets computed for every position.
The maximum value and its positions gets updated everytime a value is larger than the current one.

As a result, we get the value of 0.584458 for the subcritical and 1.2263 for the supercritical flow. Both at position 10.

Task 3.3.2
------------

For the implementation of the setups we used the statements from above.

Supercritical
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

**(File: Supercritical1d.cpp)**

.. code:: cpp

  tsunami_lab::t_real tsunami_lab::setups::Supercritical1d::getHeight(t_real i_x,
                                                                    t_real) const
  {
    if (i_x <= 25 && i_x >= 0)
    {
        return -getBathymetry(i_x, 0);
    }
    else{
        return m_height;
    }
  }

  tsunami_lab::t_real tsunami_lab::setups::Supercritical1d::getMomentumX(t_real i_x,
                                                                       t_real) const
  {
    if (i_x <= 25 && i_x >= 0)
    {
        return 0.18;
    }else
    {
        return m_momentum;
    }
  }

  tsunami_lab::t_real tsunami_lab::setups::Supercritical1d::getMomentumY(t_real,
                                                                       t_real) const
  {
    return 0;
  }

  tsunami_lab::t_real tsunami_lab::setups::Supercritical1d::getBathymetry(t_real i_x,
                                                                        t_real) const
  {
    if (i_x < 12 && i_x > 8){
        return -0.13 - (0.05 * (i_x - 10) * (i_x - 10));
    }
    else
    {
        return -0.33;
    }
  } 


**Visualisation**

.. raw:: html

    <video width="100%" height="auto" controls>
      <source src="../../_static/assets/task_3-3-2_supercritical1d.mp4" type="video/mp4">
    </video> 


**Task 3.3.3**

The hydraulic jump can be seen between cell 110 and cell 120. 
Since ``l_simulationSize`` is 25 and ``l_nx`` is 250, the hydraulic jump lies between 11 and 12 metres.
Note that the center of the rise in bathymetry is located at 10 metres.


Subcritical
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

**(File: Subcritical1d.cpp)**

.. code:: cpp

  tsunami_lab::t_real tsunami_lab::setups::Subcritical1d::getHeight(t_real i_x,
                                                                  t_real) const
  {   
    if(i_x <= 25 && i_x >= 0) 
    {
        return -getBathymetry(i_x, 0);
    }
    else
    {
        return m_height;
    }
  }

  tsunami_lab::t_real tsunami_lab::setups::Subcritical1d::getMomentumX(t_real i_x,
                                                                     t_real) const
  {
    if(i_x <= 25 && i_x >= 0) {
        return 4.42;
    }
    else
    {
        return m_momentum;
    }
  }

  tsunami_lab::t_real tsunami_lab::setups::Subcritical1d::getMomentumY(t_real,
                                                                     t_real) const
  {
    return 0;
  }

  tsunami_lab::t_real tsunami_lab::setups::Subcritical1d::getBathymetry(t_real i_x,
                                                                      t_real) const
  {
    if(i_x < 12 && i_x > 8)
    {
        return -1.8 - (0.05 * (i_x - 10) * (i_x - 10));
    }
    else
    {
        return -2;
    }
  }


**Visualisation**

.. raw:: html

    <video width="100%" height="auto" controls>
      <source src="../../_static/assets/task_3-3-2_subcritical1d.mp4" type="video/mp4">
    </video> 

3.4. 1D Tsunami Simulation
================================

Task 3.4.1
--------------------------
We have used the `GEBCO grid <https://www.gebco.net/data_and_products/gridded_bathymetry_data/>`__ from 2021 to collect the bathymetry data.
With `the Generic Mapping Tool <https://www.generic-mapping-tools.org>`__ we cut data and transformed it into a `csv` file. 

Task 3.4.2
--------------------------
For this task we used the function *splitline()* that we implemented last week.

(**File: Csv.cpp**)

.. code:: cpp

    std::vector<std::string> tsunami_lab::io::Csv::splitLine(std::stringstream line, 
                                                             char separator,
                                                             std::vector<std::string> &valuesVector)
    {
        std::vector<std::string> result;
        std::string word;
        while (getline(line, word, separator))
            result.push_back(word);
        valuesVector result;
    }

This function takes one line as a stringstream of the `csv` file as one input 
and the character which separates the different values as another.
There is a pointer to the vector of strings, which represents the, by the separator character, separated values of the `csv` file.

Task 3.4.3
--------------------------

Following setup is given 

.. math::
  \begin{split}\begin{split}
    h  &= \begin{cases}
            \max( -b_\text{in}, \delta), &\text{if } b_\text{in} < 0 \\
            0, &\text{else}
          \end{cases}\\
    hu &= 0\\
    b  &= \begin{cases}
            \min(b_\text{in}, -\delta) + d, & \text{ if } b_\text{in} < 0\\
            \max(b_\text{in}, \delta) + d, & \text{ else}.
          \end{cases}
    \end{split}\end{split}

To compute the values above we need the vertical displacement for the location x.


.. math:: 
  \begin{split}d(x) = \begin{cases}
       10\cdot\sin(\frac{x-175000}{37500} \pi + \pi), & \text{ if } 175000 < x < 250000 \\
       0, &\text{else}.
  \end{cases}\end{split}

**Constructor**

.. code:: cpp

    tsunami_lab::t_real tsunami_lab::setups::TsunamiEvent1d::computeD(t_real i_x,
                                                                      t_real) const
    {
      i_x *= 250;
      if (i_x < 250000 && 175000 < i_x)
      {
          return 10 * sin(((i_x - 175000) / 37500) * m_pi + m_pi);
      }
      else
      {
          return 0;
      }
    }
  
We have to multiply the location of x by 250, because one point is sampled every 250 meters.

.. note:: :math:`\delta` is the constant to avoid running into numerical issues. It is set to 20.


**Constructor**

.. code:: cpp

  tsunami_lab::setups::TsunamiEvent1d::TsunamiEvent1d(const std::string &i_file)
  {
    if(!std::filesystem::exists(i_file)){
        std::cout << "Error: File not found " << "(TsunamiEvent1d.cpp)" << std::endl;
        exit(1);
    }

    std::ifstream l_inputFile(i_file);
    m_bathymetry = new std::vector<tsunami_lab::t_real>;

    std::string l_line;
    std::vector<std::string> l_row;
    while (getline(l_inputFile, l_line))
    {
        if (l_line.substr(0, 1) == "#")
            continue;
        tsunami_lab::io::Csv::splitLine(std::stringstream(l_line), ',', l_row);
        m_bathymetry->push_back(std::stof(l_row[3]));
    }
    l_inputFile.close();
    m_bathymetryDataSize = m_bathymetry->size();
  }

The constructor gets the path to a bathymetry csv file as its input.
As long as there is a new line in the csv file, the loop continues and writes the bathymetry into the vector.
  
The momentum functions always return 0.

**getBathymetry()**

.. code:: cpp
  
    tsunami_lab::t_real tsunami_lab::setups::TsunamiEvent1d::getBathymetry(t_real i_x,
                                                                        t_real) const{
      if (i_x <= (m_bathymetryDataSize - 1))
        {
            t_real l_currBath = m_bathymetry->at(int(i_x));
            if (l_currBath < 0)
            {
                if (l_currBath < -m_delta)
                {
                    return l_currBath + computeD(i_x, 0);
                }
                else
                {
                    return -m_delta + computeD(i_x, 0);
                }
            }
            else
            {
                if (l_currBath > m_delta)
                {
                    return l_currBath + computeD(i_x, 0);
                }
                else
                {
                    return m_delta + computeD(i_x, 0);
                }
            }
        }
        else
        {
            return 0;
        }
      }

For the bathymetry we first check if there is a legal access for the vector. After that, we check the min and max cases for either
:math:`b_{in}` < 0 or the else case. In both scenarios we have to add the vertical displacement.

**getHeight()**

.. code:: cpp

  tsunami_lab::t_real tsunami_lab::setups::TsunamiEvent1d::getHeight(t_real i_x,
                                                                   t_real) const
  {
    if (i_x <= (m_bathymetryDataSize - 1) && m_bathymetry->at(int(i_x)) < 0)
    {
        if (-(m_bathymetry->at(int(i_x))) < m_delta)
        {
            return m_delta;
        }
        else
        {
            return -(m_bathymetry->at(int(i_x)));
        }
    }
    else
    {
        return 0;
    }
  }

Similar to ``getBathymetry()`` we check for the access and also whether :math:`b_{in}` < 0 or not.
Depending on that, we return the maximum of either :math:`-b_{in}` and :math:`\delta` or 0.

Task 3.4.4
--------------------------

*Visualisation*

.. raw:: html

    <video width="100%" height="auto" controls>
      <source src="../../_static/assets/tsunamiEvent1d_01.mp4" type="video/mp4">
    </video> 

As we can see, the wave propagates over time.

.. note::

  The wave reflecting from the left side happens because of the given condition
  ``Cells which are initially dry stay dry for the entire simulation``.